Make an effort, um, as well to come
and, uh, for here today.
Um, and now you, I think you understand the, uh,
we have 10 minutes.
Um, take your submission as read. Mm-hmm.
Um, we will just, actually, you have got new submitters, uh,
new members of the committee here.
So I'm Greg O'Connor, who you know Yep. Ing from
Inland. Okay.
Ish Campbell from Ireland.
Um, I now live in Christ too.
Alright, now the floor is yours.
It's kind of mine, but also gonna be a bit of yours
because as you said, I've submitted my,
um, submission.
Um, and, and I am gonna go on the lines
that you've read that.
Um, so I guess I'm gonna start off with, um,
a question of why not, um, if we take
the resources excuse, I'll call it excuse off the table,
why not have a children's select committee?
That's my question to you guys.
Who would like to answer it? Or does everyone want to?
No, we are here to hear from you.
Um, so you, your job is to convince us why we should,
and then what we do is we will look at the other evidence
we may even hear from someone else.
Then we go away and decide that from what we've heard,
that uh, we are happy with that.
So you tell us why we should,
that's the way it works here. Alright,
Great. Then I'll go
straight into the implementation
for the convention on the rights of a child.
As part of that agreement which New Zealand has signed,
there is a, um, coordinated coordination
around the implementation that says, um,
that the lack of available resources cannot be used
as a reason for not establishing programs or safety nets.
So I think that's a really key thing
to consider when you are deliberating.
Um, if we go to each of the articles, the 42 articles,
let me just find them
amongst my company.
That's alright. I bought a whole lot of stuff, so it,
alright, I've got notes here.
A little daunting here. So, article three, article three.
Under that, um, convention says
that when adults make decisions affecting children,
they must think about
what is in the best interest of the child.
Politicians, authorities in the courts must consider
how their decisions affect children,
whether it's one child or many.
Now, that to me means that most decisions
that are being made
and going through existing select committees should be
considering that I would venture that
that is not happening at the extent that it should.
Um, one of my questions was gonna be,
would you estimate the amount of time
that children are considered when you're making decisions on
funding for mental health?
Considering New Zealand that has the worst statistics.
We are last on the table in the OECD
for child youth suicides, but that's disgusting.
It really is. We should be appalled,
but that's where we stand.
Like, I'm even, sorry, I'm going,
I'm getting tingles now from it
because it just appalls me that a country that over-indexes
on such good stuff like sport, um, you know, some
of our AC academic, um, people, our artists, we do really,
really well in some areas.
Yet we are last on the table for that.
And that's, that's really poignant.
That's children killing themselves.
We are the worst country in the OECD.
Now my petition for establishing that committee
in this instance would apply
more focus on children for funding when it comes
to mental health.
Our mental health system is broken at the moment.
I know overall it's broken. We've gotta start somewhere.
It's pretty, it's gonna be, it's a big thing
to think about kids, but why can't we start with them?
Because the future outlook for
that is if we are helping them out now,
that's less we have to spend later.
And that goes across the board for anything.
If we are looking at harsher penalties,
why don't what harsher penalties for children
that shouldn't be happening.
We should be looking at how can we teach these kids?
How can we support adults
and parents to be a community, raise these kids
and, and come together.
You know, the old school way
of the communities coming together
and looking out for each other is gone.
That is gone. New Zealand should have that back
because as part of that,
and I'm sure Greg, you would understand that being
in your previous career of being a police officer
where you know all of the rat bags, um, around town
and get involved with them and,
and proactively get involved.
Um, there's just not enough of that happening.
I can see the Children's Select committee looking at
policing and going, where, where are we missing the children
that are falling through the cracks in our police system?
Justice, where, what's happening with our children?
We have an amazing organization in Masterton called the WA
Upper Boxing Academy,
and I do implore you to look into them.
They engage with kids at all age levels,
um, in all backgrounds.
They came down and supported the local children's day
wearing their pink fluoro vests.
All of them equal. They set up all the gazebos.
So these kids come out
and do work in the community with no expectation of a return
as part of their academy.
So the boxing academy isn't just about boxing, it's about
engaging in a sport.
It's about exercise, it's about discipline,
but they also encourage them
to get out in the community and give back.
Now, organizations like that intervening at an earlier age
is what we should be looking at and investing in.
I think investment wise,
whatever time is spent in the finance committee,
investment wise, I've seen funding $6 million worth
of funding go to an organization
and master in that won't be named that operated
for six years, didn't do their job
and then didn't get a continuing contract.
Now we talk about resources. There's resources being wasted.
A children's select committee can look
specifically at funding that's going to these types
of organizations where there is no outcomes.
To me, in my previous business background,
we called it shrinkage.
Now if we looked at the percentage shrinkage of government
and took that and put it where there's better outcomes,
what would the future look like?
Less spend on justice, less spend in the prisons,
less spend on health, less spend in mental health area.
It's across the board. It is long term.
It's big picture thinking.
It's not this is going
to get me in voted in the next election.
It is big picture.
We need to do this to improve our social fabric.
I dunno what time we are actually now. Well,
We've got about, uh, two or three minutes left.
Okay. If you, if you, if you wanted to leave time
for questions, it would probably be good time
to start summing up now, but it's up to you. It's
Your time. Can I,
uh,
can I just go then straight to article 42 of the Convention
of Rights to Children of, um, rights of a Child.
You have the right to information
and knowledge about your rights.
Parents and other adults should know about the convention on
the rights of the child.
How many people in New Zealand know about that?
Not many that I've spoken to.
I didn't even know about this
and I've been passionate about children for a long time
until I started researching and looking into it.
So again, the committee could look at ways that
that could be communicated.
The correct Shut up.
Alright, well the many questions question I'll just ask.
Do you think there's danger that if you had a
children's select committee that
everyone would send their issues off there
and it would save them from actually addressing themselves?
That would actually become somewhere to, you could send
your issues and say, well it's not our, we don't own this,
we can let someone else own
it. Do you think there's an issue
There? When you say
everyone, what do you refer
To? Well, no. So if you, you
have an organization, even some
of those ones you talk about, yeah, they would say, well,
we'll they've got this children's select committee,
so we'll send the issues there
and then we don't have to do, we, we've done our bit.
So again, in my submission I talked about courageous
decisions on structure
and having really clear structure of what
that committee is gonna look at.
Because if it's focused on outcomes,
if it's solely focused on outcomes, improving spending,
improving our mental health system,
if it's focused on outcomes
and that's what the outcomes are, the issues need
to be pushed back on because the more in we are becoming
a society where everything is someone else's fault. Right.
Alright. Thank you.
Thank you Kylie, for caring so much about our tam.
Something that we all on this committee, uh,
really care about.
We want to country where our kids are safe.
They've got stability and that aha they deserve.
Um, so I am really guided by
that UN rights the child.
And at the moment in our legislation it says that, um,
the act as in OT are to be guided by the convention.
So because you've come up with a solution, um,
I wonder if the, another solution, um,
that you've thought about is actually,
if we actually just make legislation mean that we have
to actually have all
of our legislation follow the UN rights of the child.
Like rather than have a select committee,
maybe we could just change, change legislation to say that
all of our, all of our laws have
to follow the UN rights of the child. Mm-hmm.
Um, I'm very, I like that.
I'm very much a why re you know,
create something from scratch.
We've got a really good framework
and an implementation plan right there that can be used.
Um, statistically we're not using that correctly.
Um, why, the reason why we are not just following all that
as a baseline, I don't know.
That's probably a question to government for that.
Absolutely. Kiara, I, um, spent the first, uh, 18 years
of my Life Master and um, so
It's good to hear great things that are happening, uh,
in the, um, uh, I've a first term mp
so I think I'm starting to get my head
around how this place works.
Uh, I think I've probably got some good news for you.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and that is that, um, between the, uh,
ministry also for the Children's Commission, um,
through the Social Investment agency
and then also through the increase, um,
or through the, um, the establishment
of the ministry for mental health.
Uh, a lot of the things, in fact, almost all of the things
that you've been asking for today are, um,
at various points of coming through.
And, uh, and I've just, um, um, echo what said was
that every member that I've spoken to is, um,
a hundred percent keen on what you are talking about.
The select committee process wouldn't actually be the
place to drive those things.
It's not the way in terms of
where select committees sit in terms of how legislation is
and, uh, is reviewed, uh,
or what essentially reviews, um, legislation that comes
through, um, from higher up the chain.
It's actually in terms of inputting into the higher up the
chain, it's those other
agencies that would actually drive that.
So what I would encourage you to do Yep.
Is to, um, is to engage, uh, with your,
with all your passion with those agencies.
Mm-hmm. So social investment agency. Yeah.
The children's mission you probably already are
and then is in terms of what the Minister of Mental Health
Is doing now. Yeah.
But thank you again so much for your advocacy.
Thank you. And do have a look at the auditor general's
report that just came out today Oh, okay.
At lunch time. Awesome. Okay. Cool. Thank you.
Alright, well Molly, thank you
for making the trip over the hill.
That's all right. I appreciate it. It's worth it.
And look we'll, and as I said, we'll now, um,
till we've got some more submitters now another issue,
but, uh, we'll then determine where to prepare.
Cool. Um, the five minutes later on,
is that when you deliberate?
I'm not there for that. No. Cool. No, no.
We just, this is way we here this for public hearings.
Awesome. Thank, thank you very much for your time guys.
Thank you. Welcome to remain too, mate.
Alright. We have Mr.
Peacock, he's coming in via Zoom.
Um, our local government representatives, our, um,
submitter is coming in via Zoom, so you are welcome to come
to the table and we'll just, uh,
we'll give them this, um, easier for you
to see and hear from there.
That's cool. Thank you.
Is there a screen directly in front of you there? No.
Yes, no, that's what I was gonna say. Good morning team.
Hope you can hear me. Alright. We got, uh, Mr. Peacock.
Good morning, sir. Or afternoon,
Should I say? In, in New Zealand.
Good afternoon. Um, now thank you.
Have you been watching the previous, uh, submitters?
Yes. I, what's the last one?
It made a lot of sense. Alright, so,
So you've heard our introduction,
so you know who's here, who you're speaking with.
Yes sir. So, um, you have 10 minutes, um,
and it's yours to use,
although it would be good if you could leave some time
for questions at the end.
So thank you. Oh, there you are. No problem.
Yeah. Um, yeah, basically you, you, I'm,
you've read my submission, um,
Keeley's a really struggling like right across the country,
um, with our trying to handle our rates, bills,
insurance bills and cost of living.
And the national government's been doing a great job.
Um, and our tax cuts this year
with Mo last year, we've most appreciated.
But they have been eaten up so rapidly from,
from our councils, um, that
they'll be gone in a year.
Government aren't in a situation
or in, in a position to offer those sort
of tax cuts annually.
Um, and I believe the easiest way to help New Zealanders,
um, cope with the rising cost of living will be to help for,
for government to pass the law to, um,
limit the increases in, in regional local council rates.
And, and I think a maximum
of the current inflation in any one year would be fair
because that's what all other businesses
and other families in New Zealand face.
Alright. No, that, that's that.
So that speaks very strongly to your submission.
Um, would you accept that
there would be then the requirement
to cut some existing services from, um, the, from,
from many of these councils?
I, I would, um, things like, um, putting on rock concerts
I don't think is core business yet.
We have our selling times, uh,
we're selling sounds every year.
Um, yes, we, we do have to cut some services,
but if councils co um,
concentrate on getting the basics done right, um,
then they should look at what's left over.
I, I don't think they are in a situation
where they could turn around in 2021, for instance,
like our council did, um,
and have an annual plan that said over the next 10 years,
the average rate increase will be no more than 6%
and then just three years later start whacking on 14.5,
14.9% rate, rate increases.
It's not fair. Um, it erodes democracy
and isn't sustainable for New Zealand families.
Alright. Questions members?
Uh, no, I'm keen
to hear from these guys
possibly if we can have the dialogue.
Is that so, so Alan, we've got the, um,
representative from local government New Zealand here.
Um, yeah. So to try to turn this as much of a dialogue,
they're at the table at the moment, so we'll get them
to now give, um, their point of view
and we can actually, uh, we'll keep you on
and we can, um, we can mix, mix
and match if the local government New Zealand
representatives are happy to do that.
Sounds good. I see them very
enthusiastically nodding, so that's great.
So, um, thank you. Thank you Campbell, um, for you, um, here
and, uh, Liam, is it?
Alright, so we would love to hear from you,
Right? No, thank you
very much. And thank you for the opportunity
to be able to speak to, uh, this permit, uh, uh, petition.
Uh, so I'm Campbell Barry. I'm the Vice President
of local government New Zealand,
and Liam Doyle is the senior policy
and advocacy, uh, advisor.
So you would've seen a submission, so I won't, you know,
sort of go through that,
but I thought I would just touch on some key points.
Um, first off, I'll just say
that local government New Zealand, uh,
generally opposes a, a rates cap.
Now we certainly don't oppose working together
and how we can bring costs down families
and some of the issues that Alan raised around the bite
that is happening out there are absolutely accurate.
Um, but we don't believe a rates cap is,
is the way to be able to do that.
Um, there's a few reasons for that.
Uh, s
and p uh, have just recently said that, um, rates capping,
uh, potential of a rates cap, uh,
could impact council's borrowing abilities.
So basically making it more expensive,
the borrower having interest rates a bit higher.
Um, we also know, uh, that rates, uh, rises, uh,
really have come from, um, in more recent times pretty, uh,
structural problems like underinvestment
and water infrastructure
and other mainly infrastructure issues, uh,
around the country as well.
Um, overseas we've also seen that rates capping, uh,
can often have the unintended consequence, uh,
of having an underinvestment in
that core basic infrastructure as well.
And in places like New South Wales is what you've seen, uh,
is that they might have a rates cap, they might keep
that rates down for a little bit
and then you suddenly have a correction, um,
or a spike, uh, in the level of rates
because they've realized, gosh, this hasn't quite worked.
Um, and you end up actually having more expensive rates
generally 'cause you're trying to then play catch up on all
the underinvestment that's occurred.
Um, you also have the risk of service cuts, um,
which has happened elsewhere.
Um, and, and I think, uh, you know, ultimately, um,
I understand that, you know, I understand politics a bit.
Um, it, it is good politics, um, I think to be able to send
that message of keeping rates down the likes,
but it is not good policy
and it will exacerbate some of the issues,
structural issues, like I say, um,
that are facing local government.
Um, the other thing I would mention is that I,
I do differ from Alan's point of view
around, um, local democracy.
I think a rates can, it could actually kill local democracy
because you're limiting, um, ultimately council's abilities
to, to, to make decisions on behalf of their communities.
Uh, and the impact that that can have,
it certainly would be a further, you know,
wouldn't be a movement towards localism
or would be a movement away.
Um, and we do think there are better options.
So I think we would agree
that government has been talking about
benchmarking, for example.
I think if you get the benchmarking settings right, actually
that's a great opportunity, um, to be able
to encourage better efficiencies, being able
to compare your performance versus other councils, uh,
and to see how you can do things better.
So we are certainly not opposed to change
and how we can actually, um,
help drive some of those costs down.
Uh, we just don't want to go down a path of, um,
something we will actually make
things worse in the long run.
Um, yeah,
and also the mention of, uh, I suppose capping it to, um,
CPI inflation, um, you know, build building, um,
a bridge is quite different to baking a loaf of bread.
Um, so we know that costs, for example,
when the last three years, uh,
and bridges has gone up by 38%, significantly higher, uh,
than what councils, um,
had forecast in their long-term plans
because of the environment we're in.
Uh, same goes for sewage plants about 30%.
Um, and same for roads
and other water supply, um, infrastructure as well.
So pigging, pigging, uh, local government costs
to sort of your yoga, I suppose, what is it?
The, the basket grocery basket, um, that we use for, for,
um, CPI is is also quite fundamentally flawed.
Yeah. Anything,
Can I please respond? Wouldnt mind? Yeah, certainly.
Well through the, through me
and the chair, um, Alan, you're quite happy.
You're welcome to ask a question.
Yeah, I, I, I, local government New Zealand,
we are on the same page in that we want make, um,
local government affordable for New Zealanders
and I don't have an issue with that.
And it's really good
that you guys actually support rates capping
because I can quote the Melbourne News article
of Friday 11th April, 2025.
And this is, um, me and Sam, our local mayor.
He argued that rates capping is not the solution citing
international examples.
South Australia, which does not have rates tapping,
was compared to Victoria New South Wales
where rates tapping exists.
The latter two have lower rates costs for their communities.
We are on the same page.
It's a matter of how do we change the,
um, the playing field.
We need to make it level still.
We just wanna get some of the bumps out of it.
Um, one of the things if we could do is
stop councils from building gold plated projects
and start doing fit for purpose.
Um, our library, I don't know if you've got the photograph
of our library building in, in er, um,
we've got a library building that's national awards.
It's also a lot smaller than the building it replaced.
Um, we've also got a situation,
a ridiculous situation in Darfield, which I've cited
as an example on one street corner
where there are four signs for the same council facility.
If we could pull in some of the wasteful spending, um,
and show a bit more common sense,
I think we'd end up doing a lot better.
You said about, um, trust
before there's a real erosion of trust and, and,
and again, I can only speak
for sell in this particular thing, um, thing,
but the, the water, uh, local water, um, W-S-C-C-O,
we have a situation where of those respondents, um, who
uh, spoke about it,
86.1% were against the council setting up its own watering
entity and would rather keep it in house.
And yet we've got counselors who've gone against the will
of the people is that democracy
when we have an overwhelming number who wants something
and councils turn around
and do something else, we need to be fair
and we need to uphold the values of democracy.
And I don't think at the moment we are, I know,
I know councils are in a hell of a nasty situation.
Um, the situations like we are putting new subdivisions in
and, um, we need to watch the development contributions so
that those people who are putting the subdivisions in,
the developers who are profiting from it are paying a fair
share and not the rate payers.
And I believe our current rate, uh, distribute, uh,
our current, um, requirement for, um,
developers, it's only like, it's only like 15% of the cost
of putting infrastructure in right now. Mr.
Mr Mr. Peacock, I think you're, you're making some quite
good broad points there.
I just want to make sure too,
the committee members have the opportunity
to ask some questions.
And one question I was just gonna ask, um, Mr. Barry,
local government of New Zealand, uh,
now reasonably experienced mayor, that, um, would it be fair
to say that everyone has their own idea of
how the council should be spending money?
Um, and that one man's meat is another woman's poison.
Um, would, uh, any any comment on that?
Yeah, I'll, I'll give you another one.
One, one man's waste is another man's treasure.
Um, and that is a problem that councils have on a day-to-day
basis trying to balance between what communities, uh,
uh, are looking for costs, um, uh, financial sustainability,
um, and, and trying to get that right.
And ultimately that's why we have elections.
So the local communities can choose who represent them
around the table, um, and make those decisions.
And if people don't like it, they can go to the ballot box
and and, and vote for someone else.
Um, that's, you know, that's sort of
as basic as it is, I think.
But I suppose what I would say on top of that balancing act,
there are some fundamental issues around the state
of infrastructure and the state of,
of local government generally,
which just make everything a lot more harder.
Um, and, and I totally acknowledge
as a council who's looking at a 12% rates increase,
that's a huge impact, um, on, on our rate payers.
Um, and it's not something we take any joy in,
but we also don't take any joy in dropping that down to 5%
or or 4%
and then suddenly, you know, not fixing the leaks,
which we know have been a major issue
for us in the Wellington region.
So it's a, we are in a bit of a tough spot,
but I would say Alan, Alan didn't say that I, I supported
or at we sort support rates.
That's not the case and I didn't say that. No.
Yeah, the wording on the article does say that,
but apart from that no, I totally agree with you.
And um, yeah, I, I don't know how it works.
We, we have, we have a couple
of small businesses we're looking to close down
because we can't afford to stay in business.
Um, I don't know, I don't know all the solution
but solutions to it, I think government need
to have a really good talk with local government New Zealand
and come up with equitable ways, um, that allow councils
to function and invest as it's required.
Um, but in such a manner
that the poor rate payers aren't hammered.
We we're not a stone outta which blood can be squeezed.
And that's how we feel at the moment.
And when pensioners that we talk to in, in,
in our own area are saying they're gonna have
to sell their houses to,
to downgrade their living standards, to be able to
find a cheaper property to buy to,
to pay their rates bills means something's
fundamentally wrong with our system.
Other members questions.
No, that's covered it fully.
I, I really appreciate 'em
and I, the, uh, the written submissions were,
were comprehensive and, uh, yeah.
And what you spoke about today, uh, has, yeah, has,
has added, um, further texture to that.
So thank you very much.
Alright, well, well thank you.
I think that's, uh, we, we've had a fairly comprehensive,
any, any, um, thing you'd like to sum up
or any final statements you'd like to make on
as an outgoing mayor?
Probably feeling a little bit more, um, freed up to
Do, be free and frank.
Yeah. Free, free. Feel free to make some, some
of these observations, some of the hardest things
on relating to this issue to deal with, um, as a mayor of a,
of a reasonably large city. Yeah,
Look, one thing I've been really frustrated about is
getting any traction on
what different revenue streams could, could look like
for, for local government.
There's some good conversations around, um, GST sharing on,
um, on, on new builds and a
and a, a few other pieces of work
that the government's currently looking at.
And, and that's positive. But my fear is
that we are not dealing to what is a bit
of a ticking time bomb in, in local government.
Uh, and the compounding effect
of a 10% rates increase every year over the next, say five,
10 years will have a huge impact on, on rate payers.
And it is unsustainable.
I think I would totally agree with Alan on that.
Um, but the answer isn't then, oh, we just don't do anything
or we, or we run our infrastructure into the ground.
We, we need to have that conversation about, you know,
how do we change those settings.
So I'm hoping that can happen at some point
And, and without, I suppose, um,
pushing the barrel out there too much.
Um, the opportunities for amalgamation
of different local bodies could, again, it's, um,
don't feel free not to answer this,
but you see that done properly as a way of mitigating
some of the costs
or particularly smaller councils like sell 'em.
I, I think what you'd find
with reorganization amalgamation, uh, is you all,
all the evidence shows you'd see
benefits probably for about five years.
You know, IT systems not having, you know, three,
four different sets of KPIs processes, long-term plans,
planning, um, chief executives, you,
you would see some efficiencies there,
but they would quickly run out.
Um, so I again would say
that's potentially rearranging the
deck chairs on the Titanic.
Um, the problems which councils face across New Zealand are
similar in WAN as they are in, um,
because of the settings of how their budgets work and their,
and their revenue streams that they have access to.
So, um, I, you know, the, something we advocate
for at our Gen Z is the toolbox approach.
You know, congestion, charging fuel levies, um,
GST new builds, bid tax, value capture tools.
And not saying that we want to smack all
of those into a certain area in one go,
but giving councils the decision making ability to, to apply
what works for them, um,
and for them to be accountable to their electorate, uh,
or their constituents on what they decide to do
that would help ease the burden on, on basically trying
to fund everything through rates
Or, that's a fairly good summary, I think.
Can I, can I just ask the question?
We've, we've got two minutes. So
You focus very much on,
on revenue revenue but not expenditure.
So you're focused really much on raising more money.
What about the expenditures,
expenditure side of the equation?
Yeah, absolutely. And I think there's things we can do now
to, to reduce costs.
Um, we can look at the LGA, um, the processes
that are put on council
through developing their long-term plans, um,
audit requirements, um, some of the costs that are driven
through national policy statement and changes.
Unfunded mandates we know is a bit of a bit of an issue.
Um, water reform is, is going to help, um, you know,
for those, particularly those councils who look to join up
and deliver their water services differently, I think
that will make a big difference.
Um, and I think, you know,
better allowing councils more flexibility
and better use, uh, with PPPs, um, all those things could,
could absolutely assist in, in reducing costs as well.
Um, and I think tho those would also be on the table.
So yeah, I did focus a little bit on revenue there,
but there are things, um, which we're also talking
with the Prime Minister and others on of, of,
of some wins we can help, you know, relieve
that burden on, on councils.
Alright, well look, Mr.
Peacock, I hope that, um,
broadening the discussion out a little.
I mean, I know, um,
and every one of us as a, as a, an electorate MP
is hearing from people like yourself of the burden of rates.
So you're not a lone voice.
And it's something that we are all very conscious of, of as,
um, our, each of our constituents, um,
starts to feel this precious.
So thank you for bringing it to us.
Um, and it's been interesting
and, uh, also thank our local government, New Zealand
for taking the time to come here
because, um, this is a, this is almost an ideal discussion
where, you know, we, we have a, the problem and,
and while, while it's not quite a solution,
certain explanation
and possibly some, some strategies for the future.
So thank you very much. Um,
or we time this afternoon, thank.